Foreword
========

The 2018 edition: This edition of this book is still work in progress. A lot of new content will be added and a through redesign will take place. `You can contribute too to this version. <http://security-and-privacy-reference-architecture.readthedocs.io/en/latest/15-appendix-contribute.html>`_

An earlier version of this eBook is also available as hard copy on `Amazon <https://www.amazon.de/Open-Reference-Architecture-Security-Privacy/dp/1540606481/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1480495211&sr=8-2&keywords=maikel+mardjan>`_. 

.. warning:: This 2018 version is still work in progress and NOT yet available as hardcopy. 

Freedom is, was and will always remain important. This applies to our
physical world as well as our digital world. To maintain our freedom we
need protection and good IT security. Good security brings freedom to
run your business the way you want, exchange information when needed and
to keep secrets when needed. Good privacy needs solid security to start with, but if you value your own freedom, you should respect your customers freedom too. So make sure you're users can trust you so respect their privacy by using tangible privacy by design principles when creating new solutions.

Good security and privacy do not have to be endlessly expensive. It
starts with good architecture and a solid design. This reference
architecture gives you a head start for creating your specific security
and privacy design. You can use the proposed security and privacy
principles and the requirements. Furthermore you can use or start with
security models we present in this reference architecture  as well. Also
a list of example security system building blocks is presented. Since
open source solutions can be valuable to lower security risks and reduce
cost in your organization all presented solutions in this reference
architecture are open source. This book also presents a list of criteria
to evaluate the quality of OSS security/privacy solutions is.

Good privacy and security is difficult and complex. Making use of
information presented in this book assures you do not have to reinvent
the wheel so to say. Good security and privacy design for information
systems is important. So do not lose your valuable time on trivial
aspects. You have security problems to solve for your unique situation!

Good protection for our privacy is getting more and more difficult and
expensive. In our opinion freedom requires very strong privacy
protection assurances. We do not yet live a world where cyber security
is always at a normal (low) risk level of protection to protect our core
information assets like business and privacy related data. We still have
a long way to go.

For privacy and security we need strong governance institutes that set
rules to keep our (online) freedom.

If you want to help to remain freedom and want a more secure world,
consider to support e.g. The Electronic Frontier Foundation
(https://www.eff.org ), a non-profit organization defending civil
liberties in the digital world. Or support a similar local non-profit
organization in your country. 

 
