OSS Security and Privacy System Building Blocks
===============================================

Introduction
------------

When you know the advantages and disadvantages of using open source
building blocks for your security architecture or design, this chapter
provides an overview on some open source security solutions. When you
have all your security/privacy principles, requirements, attack vectors
and security persona's clear the hardest task is to select (or create)
solution building blocks that covers the needed functionality. Using OSS
security or privacy Solution building Blocks within your solution
architecture can give significant advantages. See section "The power of
open for security and privacy" in this reference architecture for more
information on the advantages. 

We know we can never be complete with an overview of OSS security and
privacy applications. The overview in this chapter is created end of
2015 and is just a guidance to give you:

-  Insights on what type of products are available in the OSS domain.

-  A collection of OSS solution building blocks for your security
   architecture or design you can consider to evaluate for your specific
   use case.

-  Some ideas of solutions you are perhaps not familiar with.

There are now a million different open source software projects
published somewhere on the internet. Our holy grail is to keep track of
the top 50 security and privacy open source projects for every security
and privacy service needed within a business architecture. This way when
you need a secure logging service you can evaluate the top 50 projects
first before searching further or creating (aka forking) your own. In
this first release of this OSS Security and Privacy reference
architecture we yet are far away from this goal.

Criteria used for products mentioned in this chapter are:

-  The products must have a valid OSS license;

-  The project must be active and must meet a certain quality level;

-  The product must be in use somewhere (\*)

(\*) Unfortunately we can and never will expose information where
products are in use, however many mature products have solid references
on their website, along with active user groups.

The number of OSS security and privacy applications available is over
overwhelming. Using the following conceptual topology can help with
arranging functional to product mapping needs:

.. image:: /Images/image_19_OSSbuildingblocks.png

For every security or privacy function or service needed you should look
serious at using open transparent reusable solutions. So Open Source. Of
course many vendors provide good solid security products for specific
use cases. But when you feel you need a trivial security or privacy
service, there is almost always a working and maintained OSS application
available. When using an OSS solutions, you should have a large choice
of companies that deliver maintenance and support on this application on
commercial bases. 


